When I was five, my parents sent me to my grandmother's for the summer, which turned into a year and a half. In one way, it was traumatizing, but in other ways it was terrfic. 

There wasn't a lot to do at night for a kid, but she had a big old Random House illustrated dictionary. Gold leaf on the pages, and little alphabetical finger sized cutouts to help you flip directly to the right page. 

I started out just looking at the pictures, but then I read the words next to them. And eventually if there was a word I didn't know, I'd look that one up. 

I wound up reading that dictionary cover to cover. Want to know what I learned that wasn't in there? 

All those words are defined by each other. No word has any meaning by itself.

Linguists call this the subject-grounding problem. But I think it's the only problem. It is the most fundamental thing we get wrong on a daily basis. 

We assign words to represent reality for the convenience of communication. But sometimes we forget that assignment, and we believe some word and some part of reality are identical, forever.

This leads me not to believe in the terms right and wrong, or good and bad. Because for every pro you show me, I can show a con, and vice versa. Pro: thanks to modern medicine and scientific agriculture, more people are living longer than ever before. Con: unprecedented destruction of nature. Pro: sum of human knowledge availble at a moment's notice. Con: the internet. Pro: reading the dictionary. Con: parents abandoning me. See where I'm going with this?

There are definitions, and then there's reality, and reality doesn't care about your definitions. It is what it is, as we say now. 

Everything else is some degree of bullshit; we can't talk about reality without using words, which are all self-referential. So what's the point?

The more accurate your definitions, the closer to reality you align your words, the more successful you will be. You'll understand others better, and yourself. 

Don't ever take my word for it - look it up yourself. 
