The moons of Jupiter are a 2x4 truth. 

Galileo built his own telescopes in order to observe the heavens. At first they were capable of 3x magnification, and eventually he got to 30x. But it was enough to see the moons.   
He built these telescopes entirely by hand, using the tools and materials available to him in the 17th century. Given time, patience, and a little money, you could build one in your basement, and make the same observation in your backyard.

This observation has probably been made millions of times since then by hundreds of thousands of people. Like a 1 3/4" 2x4, the understanding of it has deepened and refined - Galileo initially mistook Saturn's rings to be two enormous moons - but not essentially changed.

Telescopes are a 2x4 truth. You can debate what it is that they show you, but not that they are showing it. Before Galileo, all the objects in the sky were thought to be made of astral matter, fundamentally different - lighter and hotter - than terrestrial matter. Seeing Jupiter had moons strongly suggested that all of it was made out of the same stuff as us and our moon. 

Another 2x4 truth: light has wave-like qualities. Just like waves in water, it reflects off some objects, and refracts or bends around others. Most dramatically, light can interfere with itself, like two waves in a small space breaking each other into small pieces and creating a grid-like pattern.

This interference pattern can easily be reproduced using simple materials. The key element consists of a sheet pierced by two small holes relatively close. Light shines through both holes onto a screen, where the pattern can be seen. 

The strength of the pattern and the width between the bands is affected by a number of factors, such as the size of the holes, and the distance between the sheet and the screen; but the distance between the holes affects the pattern the most. 

If you keep the other distances precise, and move the holes closer and farther, you can see the pattern going in and out of focus. Using the same math which explains the behavior of waves in water, from the focus distance you can calculate the length of the light waves. Thomas Young conducted these experiments in the early 1800s, and determined the wavelength of visible light.

If light travels in waves, which have a length, then those waves must also have a speed. This can also be measured with basic tools. Hippolyte Fizeau figured out how to measure it; based on the wavelength, set up a light close to your head pointed to reflect off a mirror and back to your eye. Then insert a wheel with cutout "teeth" into the path so that when the wheel spins, it alternately blocks the light source and your eye. Now, by spinning the wheel at different speeds, you find one speed where the light is never visible - in the time while the light is uncovered, racing toward the mirror 
