Embrace change because it is life. Change is the opposite of death. 

The zeitgeist today includes a heightened sensitivity to loss. You can feel it in the reactions to artists' deaths over the past few years, but also an anxiety about the loss of history and culture. Each time something from the past comes to an end begins a new cycle of wailing and self-flagellation. 

A friend emailed to tell me Johnny D's in Somerville, MA is gone. The club closed a while ago, and now the building has been knocked down. I don't think it's wild speculation to assume it will be replaced by luxury condos. 

A few years ago, this kind of loss really fucked me up, as Miles Davis would put it. But I'm reading his autobiography right now, and I have a different perspective on losses. 

In the beginning, Miles talks about Boston a lot. In the 40s and 50s, Boston's jazz scene was only and barely second to New York (Wally's Cafe on Mass Ave may be the last relic of this era). Playing with bebop greats like Charlie "Bird" Parker and later, his first great quintet brought Miles to Boston often.

In the 60s, things changed. Bird died in '55, and clubs like Minton's (where bebop was born) and Birdland (where it was raised) both closed. People lost interest in bebop. But instead of lamenting his losses, Miles put together his second great quintet and invented the bluesy modal thing on "Kind Of Blue". Widely considered to be the best jazz record ever, at quadruple platinum, it was certainly the most successful. 
b
It does seem like a door closes on this era. Owners of established clubs age out, and newer ones can't compete with expensive foodie restaurants and mixologist bars (every one of them with the same curated fonts on their menus and giant edison bulbs hanging from bare wires). Older players also age out, and the young ones have the *gall* to not replicate them exactly. 

Why was everyone so upset about the death of David Bowie or Prince? It can't be a deep connection to their music as a fan, because casual listeners were just as likely to be upset as the hardcore. And the clubs closed because they weren't making money because no one was showing up. So while the grief and mourning can't be denied, it also can't be literally for the object being grieved. 

Rather than any specific instance, the mourners grieve the end of the Rock Era. For 60 years, Rock Music dominated American culture. You used to be able to count on the fact you could small talk about certain musicians and everyone would know who they were - or at least feel obligated to pretend to. 

Like so many others in this time, this barrier has fallen and won't be back. Nowadays, people are into their own sub-thing - EDM or crust punk or freak folk or whatever. They're finding their own Minton's at a DIY basement show, or in small towns where rents are cheaper and venues are less constricted, or online.

The Rock Era was great while it lasted. But I don't have any tears to cry over it. I'm too busy thinking "What Would Miles Davis Do?", and the answer always seems to be, leave what's already done behind. In the 70s, Miles changed again, "going electric" and inventing fusion on "Bitches Brew". In the 80s, he incorporated electronic synthesizers and drum machines. Miles always asked, "What can I do with this?".

Look for the new thing and embrace it, because change is life. Change is the opposite of death. 
