The other day, my wife Amy told me she heard someone refer to their occupation as "reality disruption wizard". It's a ludicrously pretentious title, perfect for our hyperinflated social media era. But I believe such people do exist, and the best example I can think of is the recently departed Chuck Berry. 

It's safe to say Chuck Berry WAS rock'n'roll. The instrumental skills, innovative and exciting but not overly concerned with technique or novelty. The songwriting art, delivering a two and a half minute jewel you couldn't wait to listen to again. The attitude, equal parts sweet and sour. Without Chuck, you'd have no Stones, Hendrix, Zeppelin, Electric Dylan, Ramones - no rock music. Little Richard could have been a contender, but after a strong start he quickly retreated to Gospel, while Chuck forged ahead with one hit after another.  

Rock music has been pretty strongly associated with white folks over the years. Some point to Chuck's invention of himself as the first instance of the classic rock persona as evidence that all of rock music has been a cultural appropriation, stealing what he came up with. As usual, the truth is more complicated: from his first big hit, Chuck was performing an act of cultural appropriation, taking from white culture. 

That first big hit was "Maybelline" in 1955, and it was inarguably a rock'n'roll song. The guitar amp has clearly been turned all the way up, as has the tempo. The lyrics are about cars and sex, and come in a rapid fire patter - if instead of singing them he had spoken them in a "talking blues" style, he would have invented rap. 

But that rapid fire patter is the strongest clue to the song's origins. When Berry joined  pianist Johnnie Johnson's established blues band as a sideman, he found audiences at racially integrated venues ("salt and pepper clubs", as he called them) really responded to his cover of the song "Ida Red", by western swing artist Bob Wills. 

"Ida Red" is not what we'd call Country music today. It's Western Swing, which as the name implies descends from jazz. There's a fiddle playing traditional licks, but halfway through a nasty, blaring sax comes tearing in. Then a clarinet with some chromatic minor blues that wouldn't be out of place coming from a jazzbo like Sidney Bechet or Artie Shaw. Accenting the beat at the end, the pedal steel hits full chords, staccato - very unusual for that instrument, and an obvious inspiration for Johnnie's "straight eight" right-hand piano parts on all of Chuck's classic hits. 

When Chuck went to Chess Records, Marshall had no interest in the band's blues, which were fine but unremarkable. However, he immediately heard the potential in "Ida Red", and encouraged Chuck to write a version with teen-themed lyrics: "Maybelline".

"Maybelline" was a monster hit. It placed highly not only on the R&B and Country charts, but Pop as well. Everybody liked it. By the end of '55, it had sold a million copies, back when that was a big deal. This was not black music (R&B) or white music (C&W) but a new thing, a third thing created from the fusion of the two. The juxtaposition of "straight eight" and swing rhythms turned out to hide great sophistication under a veneer of simplicity - all rock music is still mining this rich rhythmic vein. 

Just as it happens to any truly new art form, many people hated it immediately. For those open to the new thing though, there were no expectations around lyrics. Chuck used the freedom to the fullest, developing a wry, honest style of storytelling, speaking directly to his audience and not his critics. But to use another term from the parlance of our times, he targeted a much younger demographic inauthentically. When Chuck wrote songs like "Sweet Little Sixteen" and "School Day", he was in his early 30s, and never experienced the life he described. 

This begins the second phase of Chuck's reality distortion masterpiece. In addition to this brand new music, Chuck presented a vision of the American Teenager which we would today call aspirational. The music was neither white nor black and the lyrics weren't either - any kid could imagine themselves getting a hot set of wheels and taking a girl out for a good time. 

Chuck's music undoubtably furthered the civil rights movement by spawning a legion of integrated and enlightened followers - the warm inclusiveness of the party called Motown, the social justice of the Hippie movement. That music didn't get copied so widely by accident. If Chuck hadn't intentionally crafted his music to appeal to white teenagers, he wouldn't have discovered those secrets (the rhythm, the lyrics, the attitude).

In the 1980s, Willie Dixon sued Led Zeppelin over 
