Some views of how the world works seem so far apart, it's like nothing could ever bridge the gap between them. But I think that perspective is distorted because it focuses on the depth of differences, and not the area of agreement. 

As human beings, there's so much we can agree on. And it doesn't matter so much which words we use to agree on this broad area. 

I'd like to call this huge collection of uncontroversial facts "2x4 truths". What do I mean by that? Not 2x2=4, but "two by four", as in the size of commercial lumber. 

2x4s have significant structural strength - you can build a multi-story house with them. You wouldn't want to, but you could burn them in the fireplace. If you threw one off the roof, it would take some measurable amount of time to hit the ground, and if you threw it again and again, you'd expect that amount of time not to vary much.

If one out of ten times, the time varied a great deal, you'd want to find out why. Maybe if you drop it next to the house, it falls faster than if you throw it out away from the house. I'm not positive - but you could measure different ways and compare.

Modern commercial two by fours actually measure 1 3/4" by 3 1/2". You might not have known that while conducting the house test. But finding out doesn't invalidate the results. We change what we need to in our common understanding and keep going. 

Some people believe the physical world results from the output of a simulation, a process running on some cosmic computer, but nothing supernatural outside the physical world exists. Others believe demons produce the illusion of the physical world, and when we die our spirit separates from our body and travels to another realm. 

No one believes that two by four falling off the roof and hitting you square in the head won't cause some serious trauma. Well, some folks do, but we say they have mental health issues, or call them straight up crazy if we're being less polite. Two by four truth is physical truth, and physical truth has a deterministic finality to it.

In fact, it is the only thing I have to ask you to take for granted to follow the rest of this explanation. If we can agree that water is wet, and two by fours have weight and length, and jumping off a roof will not end well, we can build everything else up from there. 

Because the most bare-boned essence of science just consists of the kind of experimentation we do every day. Is that driveway too icy to get up? Why won't this door stay shut? We measure, and eliminate variables, and repeat. I think this explains part of the game babies play, throwing an item off their high chair again and again: they're experimenting with gravity. 

Now I'm not suggesting it will be child's play, but from these basic blocks of 2x4 truths, we can build our way to surprising distances. We'll start with something undeniably commin: seeing the light. 
