Lately I hear a lot of people saying you shouldn't do what you love, but what you're best at. This makes sense. If you're really good at something, you owe it to the world to put that goodness out there. 

I'm a good musician, and a very successful programmer. But what I'm best at is explaining difficult concepts in simpler terms. I use that when I teach programming, and while I love that too, I have more that I want to explain.

I want to explain the similarities between modern physics and spirituality. Many have stated how they found a form of spiritual appreciation within physics, including legendary figures like Wolfgang Pauli, Erwin Schrodinger, and of course, the Elvis of physics, Einstein. 

I don't have any formal qualifications on this subject - I dropped out of college in the dot com boom and never went back - but I do have an unusual background which gives me an unusual insight. 

I come from a line of autodidacts - those who educate themselves. My grandfather was known around his neighborhood in Seattle as "the kid with the armloads of books", as every time you'd see him on the street he'd be coming from or going to the library. He read his way through the entire collection of the Seattle Public Library before he went to college. 

Same with my Dad. Even though his degrees are in mathematics and electrical engineering - quality time as a kid didn't involve a bat and ball, but Minkowski manifolds and Shannon entropy - he knows just as much as anyone I've ever met about history, art and music. I think Mom read even more than he did on those subjects, and she encouraged me to ask frankly whenever I didn't understand anything.

In addition, they were both devout Christians, and we studied scripture the same way we studied any other discipline: with vigor, rigor, and candor.

Here's the thing: what the scientific and spiritual have in common is people. Spirituality focuses on the inside; birth and death, joy and pain, meaning and existence. Science only discusses the external, the objective, unemotional, measureable. But they're both things people do, and everything people do has some basic elements in common. 

First things first, we have to make sure we're talking about exactly the same things. So we have to start with definitions.
