I wrote recently about accepting death as a part of life. A few people reached out to me, concerned because they thought I was feeling low. 

I appreciate their concern, but the opposite is true. Accepting and appreciating the importance of death gives me clarity and purpose. 

I have wanted to write, to share my thoughts, for a long time. But I've struggled to figure out how. Where do I start? What structure should I use? How do I want to present myself?

The finality of death provides answers to all of these questions, and motivation to turn those answers into action. I simply asked myself: if I were to pass on, what would I regret not communicating? 

If I could only share one thought, what would it be?

That may be a simple question, but simple and easy are not the same. Figuring out what you really think about the world is the hardest thing we have to do. In fact, it's the only thing we do. 

Babies try to figure out what words mean through a process of trial and error. The baby points at the cat and says, "Cat!", and everyone gets excited. Then the baby points at the couch and says, "Cat!", and everyone is disappointed. The baby might be trying to figure out what word means 'soft', but they have to reverse engineer the meaning through everyone's reaction. 

Linguists call this the 'subject-grounding problem'. The definition of any one word has to use other words, so the references are all circular. Think about a dictionary in a foreign language - there's no way to "get inside" that circle unless you know a few words already. 

Once children start speaking in sentences, we assume the meaning of all the basic words is obvious and permanent. But the connotations and implications that others have in their heads can be very different. People use words differently. Sometimes they misuse them, accidentally, or intentionally. Learning what words mean to other people is to learn how they think. 

The greatest effect on your effectiveness in the world comes from the things you don't know that you don't know. Kids who grow up not knowing they have color blindness often think that red and green are abstract or emotional terms, that when someone says something is red it's like saying it's "cool" or "lame". Without the self-awareness they lack some information, they assume others lack it too. 

How can you know what you don't know? In one sense, you can't. But the process of trying has brought me more success than anything else in life. Examine your limitations. Know where your boundaries lie, so you can expand them. 

Pinpointing those boundaries requires brutal honesty with yourself. You will never have a clear picture of the outside world if you do not have a clear picture of the inside world.

If I could only share one thing, true for all people, in every situation, at all times, I would say this: 

Consider that you might be wrong.
