Get started with the Linux CLI

The Command Line Interface can make you tremendously productive, but only if
you exploit its strengths. Learning how to do that can be very challenging, so
let's start with an example that illustrates why it's worth it. Then I will
give you a small but complete use case you can start practicing.

The tab key 
At the command line, pressing the tab key attempts to autocomplete a directory 
name based on any characters that have already been entered.

By default, the Linux CLI starts in the user's home directory. Type 'ls' to show
the contents. Mine looks like this:

Applications  Documents   Library   Music   Public
Desktop   Downloads   Movies    Pictures

Type a few letters of any directory name and press tab. If you entered enough
letters to exclude all directories but one, the CLI will complete it for you. 
For example, typing 'Doc' followed by the tab key autocompletes to 'Documents'.
If there aren't enough letters to exclude all directories but one, the first 
tab does nothing, but pressing tab again will show the multiple matches. 

The obvious benefit of autocompletion is saving keystrokes - you pressed four 
keys ('Doc' plus tab) instead of nine ('Documents'). That savings really adds 
up over time. But in the longer term, accuracy may be the bigger benefit.

When you tab-complete, you've proven to yourself that the intended path is 
correct. The longer a path you type out manually, the greater the potential to 
have an error somewhere within it. Compare the paths below:

'/Users/eliascarlston/Documents/writing/how-to-cli'
'/Users/eliascarlston/documents/writing/how-to-cli'

One of those paths won't work. Can you see the difference?

If you use tab to autocomplete your paths, you'll never make that error. Not 
only are you saving keystrokes, you're also verifying in real time the names
of the directories. 

I can't tell you how much heartbreak this will save you. Mis-typing a path can
cause a command to return some unrelated error; and then you waste precious 
time trying to debug that.

Showing a directory's contents

We already saw how to do this in its basic form: 'ls' (short for "list"). Lots 
of people know about the basic form of ls, but many don't know ls can show the
contents of any directory, not just the current one. 

'ls' - returns contents of current directory
'ls /Users/eliascarlston/Documents' - returns contents of directory specified
'ls /Users/eliascarlston/Documents/writing' - same

Create a new directory

The mkdir command takes a name and creates a new directory there. 

'mkdir /Users/eliascarlston/Documents/writing/how-to-cli'

Practice

Switch over completely to creating directories through the CLI. Any time you 
need a new directory, pretend the only way to do it is through the CLI. 
 - Use ls to examine directory structure 
 - mkdir to create the new directory
 - most importantly, use tab to construct all the path names
importantly, use tab to 
