I really like a thing James Altucher said: "Give your best stuff away for free."So I'd like to tell you the most original idea I've ever had. But since it's original, you'd just think it sounded crazy if I told you straight out. Instead, I have to explain.  

When you use the word universe, there's different concepts you could be referring to. Physics has several definitions, but there's two that can take on an emotional dimension in your life.

The "known" universe consists of as much as we have been able to see, using technology. Every time we invent a new technology to see farther, the known universe gets bigger. The furthest distances are no longer seen as light through telescopes, but radio waves in antennas. Still, there's a long ways to go before we hit the theoretical limit. 

The theoretical limit is called the "observable" universe. It's not observable in the sense that some other part is invisible; it means that's the farthest a perfect telescope could *ever* observe, because there hasn't been enough time for the light to get here from there yet.

The new definition I propose gets more specific about what's meant by 'here'.

The observable universe is an imaginary sphere, 14 billion light-years wide, with a center (like all spheres!) defined as the point in the middle. But there's no special reason that point has to be associated with the center of the Earth. The ratio between the distances is so great, we round off and talk about all the potential points as if there was only one. 

Instead, everyone could define the center of the observable universe as a point within their own head. If you wanted to be impersonal you could call it the measurement of maximum possible communication distance. Just picture it as a giant bubble, held to your head by the tiniest of wires. As you went through your day, you'd drag this bubble with you, so the movements of the sphere track the movements of your life. 

In a way, the movements of the sphere *are* your life. A scientific definition of it. 

Your own personal universe. 
