Dad, 

You get a lot of mileage out of that time you asked where I learned how to make good decisions and I said I "watched you and did the opposite". 

It was a snotty punk thing to say, but it wasn't untrue. It sums up my life. I am who I am because of you, and I love who I am, and so I love you. 

I love you because of your flaws. I love you because you abused me, and that was part of the mix which made me the person I love. 

When I was five, you dropped me off at Margaret's house and never came back. Well, somebody came back, a year and half later, behind a big beard I didn't recognize and different clothes. 

In the meantime, I just had to get used to you and Mom not being around. I didn't have a choice. And that turned out to be a great lesson to learn. Sometimes you don't like the way the world is, but the world doesn't give two shits what you like. It is what it is. 

And sometimes what you don't like is good for you. Margaret would take me to the library once a week, but there was nothing for a little kid to do at her house, so I'd get bored with those books quick. I started looking for things to do and found her dictionary, a full size Random House with the gilded pages. I started flipping through for the illustrations, but eventually I wound up reading the whole thing. 

I read that whole thing cover to cover. So when I came back to live with you I was fully able to take advantage of your teaching. 

You had been a teacher previously, as a graduate student. And you made yourself available to me in the same way you would for an adult. Between six and sixteen, you taught me anything I had sufficient motivation to ask you about. And through your example, you also how taught me how to teach. I learned how to be patient from you, and how to explain at the level of the listener. 

Between six and sixteen, you also moved me between eight or nine schools halfway around the world. I learned how to adapt to always being the new kid, to new cultures. But I didn't have friends to grow up with. I didn't have a home town, no where to come back to.

And you also taught me about fear and violence and impotent rage. I saw you break your hand punching a wall. You used to punch yourself in the head. Mom and I got the point: you were dangerous and should be feared.

Do you see where I'm going with this? Everything negative about you I can balance with a positive. The same is true for me. 

Every struggle in my life has pushed me to the next level. Every gift has made me weak and ungrateful. This is the secret lesson within "I watched you and did the opposite."

Not everything hard is good, but everything good is hard. If it's easy, it's not worth it. 
This is your influence on my life: embrace paradox. Do what's hard. Love the ugly person who inflicts pain.

Love hurts? Love the hurt. Love harder.

Your son, 

E
