I wrote recently about accepting death as a part of life. A few people reached out to me, concerned because they thought I was feeling low. 

I appreciate their concern, but the opposite is true. Accepting death makes me feel less anxious, because it gives me clarity about importance. For a while, everybody was writing their top ten album lists. I liked seeing those, but take the idea a step further: what's your top idea? 

If you only had one chance, what would you want as many people as possible to hear? I know what I'd like to tell you.

I think it benefits some people to emphasize the depth of our differences and ignore the breadth of our agreement. A lot of hay gets made these days about how divided we are - science versus religion, and so forth. But I think there's much more we all agree on than not. 
I started thinking about the lowest common denominator in human agreement. What would every person on the planet would agree on? 2 + 2 = 4. The sun rises in the east. Water makes things wet, people can't go more than a few days without it. An object not supported by a force equal to its weight will fall.

There's no controversy around the speed of falling, because we can all measure it. Ever since Galileo did it, students have been re-doing it, and they all get the same answer. 9.8 meters per second per second has got to be pretty close to 2 + 2 = 4 in certainty. 

Surprisingly, the speed of light can be measured almost as easily. Hippolyte Fizeau invented the experiment in the 1800s, and got within 5% of the currently accepted value (238,000 miles per second). With some moderate DIY skills, you can re-do it in your backyard. The short version: a light shines at a mirror when a notch on a wheel uncovers it, but the wheel also blocks your eye. When you spin the wheel fast enough, you start to see the light, because even though the light source is covered, the light your eye sees now left a moment ago. 

Once we found out light had a speed, that it wasn't instantaneous, it raised some questions. What's the farthest distance we can see? There's two possible limits. One is time; if light takes time to travel, then we can only see the light that's had time to get here. There's light further away that we'll see in the future. The other is Doppler shift; just like an ambulance siren's pitch dropping as it gets further away, so light sources shift towards the red end of the rainbow and then off the visible scale into radio range.

Regardless of the specific value, the fact that light has a speed strongly suggests some limit exists. The limit is called the observable universe, as opposed to the known universe. The known universe is the sphere around the earth containing what we can see with our best telescopes. Every time we build a better telescope, we expand the boundary of the known universe. The observable universe is the (imaginary) boundary where we can't see any farther, even with an absolutely perfect telescope. 

But here comes a common mistake: because the distance to that boundary is so great - 238,000 miles per second for 14 billion years! - we tend to assume there is only one boundary, centered on the earth. In fact, every point in space has its own boundary, a sphere around it representing the maximum distance of light. 

So your observable universe is not quite the same as mine. Extremely close - if you overlaid them like Venn diagrams the border would be razor thin - but that's not the same as the same. 

This is the most important idea I've had. Our shared experience, and our most personal and private experiences as individuals, can be represented by the inside and outside of those overlapping circles. 

That same concept of a boundary that can't be crossed applies to the boundary between our skulls and the outside world. 
