I don't believe in absolute truth, because I've never lost a game of pool to anyone who brought their own stick. 

Here's the thing: you have to play a different game based on the table you're using. 

I started at fourteen. My buddy Ken's family had a high quality 8' table, and we shot one game after another listening to punk rock in the basement. I moved away a few years later and didn't play for a little while. Once I had my license and a little money in my pocket, I'd go to a proper pool hall and play on regulation 9' tables. Then when I turned 21, I found that shooting pool in bars was a great way to meet some wild characters. So while I'm not a championship player, I'm pretty good in a variety of environments. 

Bar tables are a different breed. Only seven feet, they often predate the Ford administration and they've taken a lot of abuse. Their felt has an uneven texture due to wear in certain spots - the corner by the jukebox everybody sits for a minute before the bartender shoos them off - so rarely do you find one completely level. Most different, the bumpers have had all the stiffness pounded out of them, and now act in spots like sandbags. So the stick is usually not your greatest concern. You spend a minute finding the least warped one, and then concentrate on the table. 

When someone brings their own stick to a bar, it doesn't tell me they're a champion. I figure a champion would have a really expensive stick they wouldn't chance to bring out, and besides, they could beat you using a well-chalked broomstick. No, it tells me they're accustomed to playing on well-maintained regulation tables, and they're "slumming", coming down to the dive to show off for the riff-raff. They have an array of trick shots like masse and triple banks which don't work on these old beaters. As they curse the same table we both play on, I sink one simple shot after another. 

In the intensity of their big-shot desire, these guys don't consider their expertise (such as it is) in one area may not transfer to another. You might think pool players tend to be low class, and education would provide immunity against this foolishness, but of course you'd be wrong. 

At Athenahealth, my colleagues disproportionately came from Harvard, and I became friends with many of them. You'd have your work cut out to find a better group of people. But at happy hours and house parties, I also met their friends of friends, many of whom impressed me much less. 

I have a vivid memory of guy moaning about what a lousy week he'd had. He'd decided to upgrade his car stereo himself, because, in his words, "if those high school dropouts at the stereo store can do it, then it should be any problem for someone like me." I tried to communicate to him through my body language that his soul smelled like old diapers, but he just kept on talking. 

He began with extensive research and planning. After a few frustrating and dangerous false starts, and corresponding trips back to the stereo store for better tools and advice, he finally relented and brought the car in to the "dropouts" to finish the job properly. 

But his egotism wouldn't let go of his superiority. His rationalization: "the only reason they could do it and I couldn't is because they do it all the time as part of their job. If I did it all the time, I'd be good at it too." It clearly did not occur to this classist classless that the reverse was also true, that if those dropouts had done what he did - extensive study in an atmosphere of quiet discipline - they'd probably be just as book-smart. 

But even though he erred in thinking he could demote others to a position of mental inferirority, we can't dismiss his mistake as simply due to a single jerk. Any depth of expertise carries a subtle risk of arrogance.
