I remember exactly where I was twenty five years ago this month, at the Renaissance Coffeehouse on Main Street in Nashua, New Hampshire, when I heard Kurt Cobain was dead. We watched the smoke from the ashtray rise up and mingle with the steam from the coffee in the painfully crystal spring sunshine and said very little. None of us wanted that news, but like a new member of the family, there was nothing to do except learn what life would be like with it here. 

A year ago this week I got the news my friend Lisa had taken her own life. I'll never forget staring across Commercial Street, out into the water. Stretching past Fort Gorges, I imagined Casco Bay spreading miles out, out of sight of shore, mixing with the Gulf of Maine, continuing without boundary into the rough, choppy brutality of the North Atlantic. I wanted go look for the edge where the water stopped, but I knew that even if I crossed the frozen, silent, deadly Arctic, there would only be more land on the other side, more land where Lisa was no longer alive. 

No one has given a satisfactory answer to what they call the Problem of Evil: if God is good and mighty, how can there be so much suffering in the world? In the Middle Ages, people accepted a doctrine called the "abomniable fancy", where God delighted in the suffering of the damned, and those who had been saved watched the torments of Hell for entertainment. But how could God possibly enjoy flaws in his creation? There are two obvious answers - either he approves of Satan's work; or he is powerless to stop it. 

There is a less obvious answer, which is that they aren't flaws at all. I believe good and evil are shortcuts we use to make communication easier. But easy ain't better, and I prefer things to get better.

The saying goes that the Lord "works in mysterious ways." These things that seem like evil have a negative effect on us individually. It's difficult, but when viewed from a non-individual perspective, they can have positive effects at the same time. 

We don't want our loved ones to pass away because we'll miss them, and it also reminds us of our own mortality. But life is made out of death. Even if you eat in such a way you never kill an entire plant, the individual cells in the part you eat *do* have to die. Good soil, which all life on Earth depends on, is made up of organic material: stuff that used to be alive. If nothing died, there would be no chance of change or improvement. 

Modern technology has had tremendous success reducing infant mortality and famine around the world. It's very difficult to argue with someone that their healthy, smiling baby is not a good thing. But instead we get the problems of a global population which has doubled in my lifetime: climate change, competition for energy, land, and fresh water. And once all basic needs are satisfied, then people have free time to devote to anxiety, depression, anger and ideological warfare. 

Nowhere can you show me a blessing that is not in some other respect a curse. Pleasant experiences create a desire for more, a craving that's difficult to extinguish when reality changes and the source of pleasantness goes away. Likewise, the most challenging traumas we perservere through are the source of our greatest strengths. 

The concept of good and evil doesn't survive close inspection, but this does not mean all actions are the same. We just have to put in more effort to describe them accurately: is an action effective, efficient, caring, healthy? None of us want our lives to be meaningless; but we may be ignorant, in denial, afraid of the actions we should be taking. 

Negativity contains endless emptiness. You can pour unlimited resources into satisfying yourself. While you are consuming, forcing, taking from fellow humans and the rest of the world, it may feel good. But stop making sacrifices to the god of your own selfishness for one minute, and you're right back where you started. 

Hell is not other people; it is the absence of love and acceptance, it is selfishness.

Positivity is not better than negativity, it is not good where negativity is evil. But it is permanent, where negativity is temporary. When you take from someone else and appease your mind, the pleasure eventually passes and you're both left with nothing. But when you give to another, that moment of kindness is eternal. Everyone feels the spirit of abundance, and you're pleasantly surprised when that abundance you gave away returns to you. It makes a classic paradox, but in order to truly have anything, you need to be willing to let it all go. 

So without judgment, I commemorate the anniversary of Lisa's passing with a renewed commitment to living my best life. I pledge whatever traumas and tragedies fall on me, I will find a way to turn them into positive action. 

I believe the force which animates the universe - God - is too vast and complex for us to understand. But it is ultimately a force of creation. I worship God through my actions in this world - not only giving, nurturing, and building, but also accepting that force passes through other forms, which I may not like, but I have to learn to understand. 

Love is always the right answer. Try harder. 
