I really like a thing James Altucher said: "Give your best stuff away for free."So I'd like to tell you the most original idea I've ever had. But since it's original, you'd think it just sounded crazy if I told you straight out. Instead, I have to explain first.

When you use the word universe, there's several different concepts you could be referring to. Physics has several different definitions, but there's two that can take on an emotional dimension in your life.

The "known" universe consists of as much as humanity has been able to see, up to this point, using technology. The furthest distances are not seen as light through telescopes, but radio waves in antennas. Still, there's a long ways to go before we hit the theoretical limit. 

The theoretical limit is called the "observable" universe. It's not observable in the sense that some other part is invisible; it means that's the farthest a perfect telescope could *ever* see, because there hasn't been enough time for the light to get here yet.

The other meaning of observable is what an observer observes. This implies there's a separate universe for each person, and that's not an unscientfic thing to say. Every point in space defines a different observable universe.

Because the observable universe is 14 billion light-years across, compared to Earth's seven thousand miles, we round off for convenience, and pretend they're all the same. But that's not totally accurate, is it? Like we talk about "north" as one direction, while magnetic north and true north.

There's a lot of places you can go with this idea. There's another way to define a single observable universe instead of centering it on the Earth; you could define it based on the maximum overlap between personal universes. This point would still be in the center of the Earth, but offset a little based on population distribution, and even a tiny bit by astronauts going to space.

But the thread I want to pull goes backward. Imagine rewinding the movements of your life, going to bed this morning and getting up last night and doing all yesterday's doings backwards. Your personal universe follows you all the way back to your birth. 

To be continued.
