You may have heard this statement, "If you're not outraged, you're not paying attention." The first search results I found this attributed this to Heather Heyer, who was killed protesting white supremacists in Charlottesville, NC.

I respect Heather's sacrifice. I've frequently felt called, as Mick Jagger put it, to go down to the demonstration, to get my fair share of abuse. You've got to put your money where your mouth is and your body on the line. 

But I reject the demand that I have to be outraged. I challenge that statement on several terms.

The simplest: it's not a call to action, and therefore has no possibility of causing any change. Okay, I'm paying attention, now I'm outraged, check, check. What next?

What next?

Being outraged can't tell you how to help fix anything, what to do. And I think trying to figure out what to do is the central problem we all deal with most of the time.

Next challenge: that statement constitutes an order; a directive about how I should feel. 

I say no one has jurisdiction over how I feel except me. I decide if I want to be outraged or not. What if you and I accomplish all the same goals, but I'm just not mad about it? Is outrage a requirement to be involved in making the world a better place?

I reject negativity, which sounds like a contradiction in terms until you flip it. Not anti-negativity, I am pro-peace. Instead of talking about your enemies, DO something positive in the world. 

Instead of posting about how evil your enemies are, you could sign a petition. Instead of worrying about global warming, you could figure out how to eat less meat. Instead of proclaiming your views on subjects like gun control and abortion, you could volunteer in your community.

The fourth result for the search linked to a store where you could buy a t-shirt with that statement printed on it. As if you don't have enough conflict in your life already, so you wear a sign inviting more. 

And you pay someone for the privilege. Be suspicious of those who encourage you to be angry. It's frequently the glitter in your eyes, the magic trick distracting you from the grift. 

Beware anyone who wants to make you feel anything except love.
