Today, Veterans Day, honors those who have served in the armed forces. I'm thinking of my great-uncle Clarence, who saw combat as a SeaBee in the Phillipines, and my uncle Todd, who did three tours in Vietnam, and all of my friends who served. I'm thankful for their sacrifices. 

My Dad was an aerospace engineer, so while we weren't technically military, I grew up in that life: moving all over the country and then the world, always next door to a base, playing with the kids of the military men my Dad worked with. So I understand the sacrifices the families of veterans make, and I'm thankful for them too. 

I've never understood when people have insisted that supporting the troops should immediately end any critical thinking about civilian policy. It is _because_ I support the troops that I don't want them to be sent into harms way unless it is absolutely necessary; and when I'm not convinced of that necessity, I feel duty-bound to speak out. The freedom of speech veterans fought to protect must be exercised to protect them.

The other way I believe we are required to support the troops is here at home. Nothing disgusts me more as an American citizen than to know veterans are on the streets, struggling to get the support they need. 

It's meaningful to me that the date of Veterans Day, November 11th, commemorates the Armistice treaty which ended World War One. I can't think of a more fitting time to celebrate the sacrifices of our veterans than the victory of peace.

Today marks the 100th anniversary of the end of that horrifying conflict, and I challenge all of us to do more for veterans here at home. Anyone who claims they support the troops should be ashamed there are veterans hungry, alone, sleeping in the cold, begging for help.

Two organizations here in Maine I donate to and volunteer for: the Combat Veterans Motorcycle Association (https://www.cvma17-1.com/) and the Preble Street Resource Center (https://www.preblestreet.org/).

As civilians and citizens, we need to do better here at home, to make America a place and an idea worth fighting for. Let's take inspiration from veterans' fierce selflessness and start a war on homelessness.
